content/blog/cell-tower-2/index.mdx, before:

---
title: How I'd Teach the Pythagorean Theorem (Part 2)
date: "2020-08-09"
description: "Analyzing current digital pythagorean theorem problems and designing a different approach."
keywords: ["Pythagorean Theorem"]
published: false
---

import PrototypeOne from "./prototype1.tsx";

<i>
  How culturally responsive math inspired me to create a digital prototype for
  teaching the Pythagorean theorem.
</i>

### Current Digital Pythagorean Theorem Problems

Before designing this lesson, I analyzed how a few commonly used digital tools approached this problem. Here are a couple examples from IXL and Khan Academy:

#### IXL - [(More Examples)](https://www.ixl.com/math/grade-7/pythagorean-theorem-find-the-length-of-the-hypotenuse)

![IXL Example](./ixl_pythagorean_theorem.png)

#### Khan Academy - [(More Examples)](https://www.khanacademy.org/math/basic-geo/basic-geometry-pythagorean-theorem/geo-pythagorean-theorem/e/pythagorean_theorem_1)

![Khan Academy Example](./khan_academy_pythagorean_theorem.png)

These questions can be effective for a quick check of student understanding to determine whether students
have understood how to apply the formula. If a teacher were to only provide students with questions like these throughout the year, however, it's easy to see why many students might not see themselves as "math people".

If we were to translate the cell tower lesson described in <a href="./cell-tower-1" target="_blank">part 1</a>, to fit one of these common digital formats, it'd likely take the form of something like:

> A cell tower has a range of 4 km. Commander King is considering buying a new house. To get to the new house from the cell tower, he would need to walk 2 km east and then 3 km south. Will his new house get cell service?

This problem feels slightly better than the IXL word example, but only marginally. While students may better relate to the frustration of not having cell service, they'll likely still question why a person couldn't just test the cell service when at the new house location.

When I first started designing my own lessons, I often fell into the trap of creating word problems like the one above. I assumed by matching a problem to a student's interest, they'd be more engaged. For example, if a student liked baseball, I might try asking students to calculate the distance from first base to third base. But in reality, I found that the more a student knew about a topic, the more the context of the problem would actually make less sense. In the baseball example, no one actually runs from first to third base, so why would this calculation be useful?

Instead of this forced connection, what I found more effective was showing how solving a problem could help people either make better sense of the world around them or make better decisions that impact their own life or the lives of others. It didn't have to directly connect to their life. Students just needed to see how at least one person in society might benefit from that knowledge and that's what made it interesting.

In this case, the cell tower problem produced by TACIB gave me a really solid context. Deciding where to build a cell phone tower has a significant impact on people who live near the tower as they'll have access to better cell service. It can also start digging into deeper questions about whether everyone, even those who may live in less densely populated areas should have cell service and if so, what are the costs? Are there other concerns for residents who need to live closely to a cell tower?

Had such a context not been provided, I would really need to first spend time thinking about a real problem that the Pythagorean theorem could help solve and by solving that problem, what new insights do we gain?

### First Attempt

The key question in the TACIB cell tower problem is should a tower be built at a given location? In one of the lessons, students are provided a map of Anaheim and asked to calculate the distance between cell towers and certain locations to help students see whether certain areas are covered by the tower. I appreciate how this question can help students immediately see that the result of solving these problems is that they can have a more informed decision about whether certain areas get cell service coverage or not.

So I started with a prototype that was something like the following:

<PrototypeOne />

Not too bad. There are a few things I liked about this problem.

1. It makes a strong connection between solving a problem and gaining a piece of useful information. By applying the Pythagorean theorem, one can determine whether a household could receive cellular service. The wording of the question here is critical. Rather than asking students to calculate the distance between the cellular tower and each of the three households, I explicitly choose to ask about whether they receive cell coverage. This puts the emphasis on the impact of solving the problem. What matters here isn't the distance, but whether people can actually get coverage.

2. In one problem, we offer three opportunities for students to apply the Pythagorean theorem. This gives us some flexibility in how we use this problem. A teacher could for example, follow an "I do, we do, you do" approach in which they model with one household, get student volunteers to work together on computing another problem, and ask students to determine the last problem.

3. Another approach could be to ask a group of students to split up the households so that they could each calculate the distance of one household, compare and contrast their work, and as a group make a team decision about whether all households would receive cell phone coverage.

4. There is some room for students to approach this problem differently in meaningful ways. For example, the blind approach to this problem would be for a student to calculate the distance between every household and the cell tower. But some students might first estimate the distance of each household to the cell tower. That might help them determine certain households are already out of range and do not need a calclulation.

Here's what I still wanted to improve:

1. Ultimately, the primary work is still performing a calculation and at most reaches the "analyze" level of Bloom's taxonomy. There's some critical thinking for students who take a creative approach. While not every lesson or problem can invoke the highest tiers of Bloom's taxonomy or require high levels of critical thinking, I wanted to see if we could make some small adjustments that could help it require students to evaluate or create.

### Second Attempt

### Design Constraints

- Meets two Common Core Standards on Pythagorean Theorem
  1. CCSS.Math.Content.8.G.B.7 - Apply the Pythagorean Theorem to determine unknown side lengths in right triangles in real-world and mathematical problems in two and three dimensions.
  1. CCSS.Math.Content.8.G.B.8 - Apply the Pythagorean Theorem to find the distance between two points in a coordinate system.
- Provides opportunities for students to take a different approach to solve the problem

Commit message:

use simple grid and update blog text

content/blog/cell-tower-2/index.mdx, after:

---
title: How I'd Teach the Pythagorean Theorem (Part 2)
date: "2020-08-09"
description: "Analyzing current digital pythagorean theorem problems and designing a different approach."
keywords: ["Pythagorean Theorem"]
published: false
---

import PrototypeOne from "./prototype1.tsx";
import PrototypeTwo from "./prototype2.tsx";

<i>
  How culturally responsive math inspired me to create a digital prototype for
  teaching the Pythagorean theorem.
</i>

### Current Digital Pythagorean Theorem Problems

Before designing this lesson, I analyzed how a few commonly used digital tools approached this problem. Here are a couple examples from IXL and Khan Academy:

#### IXL - [(More Examples)](https://www.ixl.com/math/grade-7/pythagorean-theorem-find-the-length-of-the-hypotenuse)

![IXL Example](./ixl_pythagorean_theorem.png)

#### Khan Academy - [(More Examples)](https://www.khanacademy.org/math/basic-geo/basic-geometry-pythagorean-theorem/geo-pythagorean-theorem/e/pythagorean_theorem_1)

![Khan Academy Example](./khan_academy_pythagorean_theorem.png)

These questions can be effective for a quick check of student understanding to determine whether students
have understood how to apply the formula. If a teacher were to only provide students with questions like these throughout the year, however, it's easy to see why many students might not see themselves as "math people".

If we were to translate the cell tower lesson described in <a href="./cell-tower-1" target="_blank">part 1</a>, to fit one of these common digital formats, it'd likely take the form of something like:

> A cell tower has a range of 4 km. Commander King is considering buying a new house. To get to the new house from the cell tower, he would need to walk 2 km east and then 3 km south. Will his new house get cell service?

This problem feels slightly better than the IXL word example, but only marginally. While students may better relate to the frustration of not having cell service, they'll likely still question why a person couldn't just test the cell service when at the new house location.

When I first started designing my own lessons, I often fell into the trap of creating word problems like the one above. I assumed by matching a problem to a student's interest, they'd be more engaged. For example, if a student liked baseball, I might try asking students to calculate the distance from first base to third base. But in reality, I found that the more a student knew about a topic, the more the context of the problem would actually make less sense. In the baseball example, no one actually runs from first to third base, so why would this calculation be useful?

Instead of this forced connection, what I found more effective was showing how solving a problem could help people either make better sense of the world around them or make better decisions that impact their own life or the lives of others. It didn't have to directly connect to their life. Students just needed to see how at least one person in society might benefit from that knowledge and that's what made it interesting.

In this case, the cell tower problem produced by TACIB gave me a really solid context. Deciding where to build a cell phone tower has a significant impact on people who live near the tower as they'll have access to better cell service. It can also start digging into deeper questions about whether everyone, even those who may live in less densely populated areas should have cell service and if so, what are the costs? Are there other concerns for residents who need to live closely to a cell tower?

Had such a context not been provided, I would really need to first spend time thinking about a real problem that the Pythagorean theorem could help solve and by solving that problem, what new insights do we gain?

### First Attempt

The key question in the TACIB cell tower problem is should a tower be built at a given location? In one of the lessons, students are provided a map of Anaheim and asked to calculate the distance between cell towers and certain locations to help students see whether certain areas are covered by the tower. I appreciate how this question can help students immediately see that the result of solving these problems is that they can have a more informed decision about whether certain areas get cell service coverage or not.

I started with the following prototype.

<PrototypeOne />

Not too bad. There are a few things I liked about this problem.

1. It makes a strong connection between solving a problem and gaining a piece of useful information. By applying the Pythagorean theorem, one can determine whether a household could receive cellular service. The wording of the question here is critical. Rather than asking students to calculate the distance between the cellular tower and each of the three households, I explicitly choose to ask about whether they receive cell coverage. This puts the emphasis on the impact of solving the problem. What matters here isn't the distance, but whether people can actually get coverage.

2. In one problem, we offer three opportunities for students to apply the Pythagorean theorem. This gives us some flexibility in how we use this problem. A teacher could for example, follow an "I do, we do, you do" approach in which they model with one household, get student volunteers to work together on computing another problem, and ask students to determine the last problem.

3. Another approach could be to ask a group of students to split up the households so that they could each calculate the distance of one household, compare and contrast their work, and as a group make a team decision about whether all households would receive cell phone coverage.

4. There is some room for students to approach this problem differently in meaningful ways. For example, the blind approach to this problem would be for a student to calculate the distance between every household and the cell tower. But some students might first estimate the distance of each household to the cell tower. That might help them determine certain households that are well within range and do not need a calclulation.

Here's what I still wanted to improve:

1. Ultimately, the primary work is still performing a calculation and at most reaches the "apply" level of <a href="https://cft.vanderbilt.edu/guides-sub-pages/blooms-taxonomy/" target="_blank">Bloom's taxonomy</a>. While it's important teachers offer problems that do assess these lower levels of remembering, understanding, and applying, I believe that with some adjustments this problem could also offer opoprtunities for students to evaluate and analyze.

2. There is still only one right answer to the question. Again, there's nothing exactly wrong with this, but I think there's real value to showing students that there can be multiple reasonable answers to a problem. This naturally unlocks opportunities to compare and contrast answers, communicate tradeoffs, and attempt to justify the better approach for a specific context.

### Second Attempt

<PrototypeTwo />

One of the most common ways I moved to the higher tiers of Bloom's taxonomy during my time teaching was to take a problem that asked for a single answer and turned it into a question about optimizing the answer. In the example above, I ask students to optimize for the minimum number of cell towers that can be placed. This now requires students to reach for the higher tiers of analysis and evaluation. They can place the cell towers in many different locations and need to compare and contrast whether that placement is better than a different placement.

In addition, there can now actually be different answers that all meet the requirement. As a teacher, what excites me most is the opportunities this provides students when they compare and constrast answers. Normally, in a simple problem like the ones shared at the beginning of this post, students will compare answers and it's just a literal check to see if their answers match. Now, however, students can both be right and still get value out of comparing their answers. It requires them to talk through the differences in their approach and justify whether one answer might be better than the other.

### Design Constraints

- Meets two Common Core Standards on Pythagorean Theorem
  1. CCSS.Math.Content.8.G.B.7 - Apply the Pythagorean Theorem to determine unknown side lengths in right triangles in real-world and mathematical problems in two and three dimensions.
  1. CCSS.Math.Content.8.G.B.8 - Apply the Pythagorean Theorem to find the distance between two points in a coordinate system.
- Provides opportunities for students to take a different approach to solve the problem
